---
layout: post
title:      "My Road to Coding"
date:       2017-12-28 19:39:09 +0000
permalink:  my_road_to_coding
---


**WHY I WANT TO CODE**

My desire to code stems from an interest in enhancing the capabilities of humans through technology, whether through interaction or directly integrating computer hardware with the nervous system. To do the latter, however, first necessitates using technology and data science to obtain a deeper understanding of genetics and the nervous system. Only then will we know how to interact and manipulate it at a deeper level.

Now, this may fuel my inner drive to gain a more in-depth understanding of computer science, but there are also practical reasons for why I want to learn to code. To put it simply, most of today’s world revolves around technology, which necessitates we learn how to use and manipulate such devices to achieve our goals. Even when we are not wholly dependent on it, technology saves us time, energy, and increases the likelihood of successfully completing our tasks. This trend is likely to continue and the depth of knowledge required by the average person to use said technology will also increase. We are already beginning to witness this phenomenon in many professions today where having a basic understanding of coding can go a long way and, in some cases, is becoming necessary.

I hope to use the skills and coding knowledge I acquire to eventually work in the realm of machine learning and bioinformatics. This will take time, however, and it will be a while before I have acquired the skills necessary to be useful. But, I must start somewhere, which is why I am choosing to begin my journey by pursuing a career as a full stack web developer. Being a hybrid field that incorporates design and automation of applications through front-end and back-end coding, it is a good fit for me because it is in line with my interests and engages my analytical and creative nature. Most of all, though, with more people using apps and web-pages to improve their daily lives, learning to code will allow me to impact others' lives in a positive way throught a useful app or website I develop. I have some ideas already and hope that learning to code will help me create them.

I do not yet know how long I will work as a web or app developer, or even what sort of work I will be doing afterwards. What I do know is that the knowledge and skills I obtain will be transferrable and remain useful no matter which field of computer science I choose to work in.


**HOW I ENTERED THE WORLD OF COMPUTER PROGRAMMING**

I am a biologist by profession, but my interest in computers manifested itself during my pre-teens and has increased over time.

It started with a desktop computer my parents bought me when I was in middle school. I had never owned a computer before and had little to no idea what I was doing. So, unsurprisingly, I encountered problems relatively frequently as I learned my way around. Most of the time, these were minor issues, like accidentally changing a setting or two, but sometimes they were more severe, like the “blue screen of death.” Regardless of the issue, my mom's solution was to hand it off to a family acquaintance, whose answer to every problem was to reformat and reinstall Windows. I was, of course, grateful to have a properly working computer again, but it was extremely inconvenient. Losing one’s data and being forced to start from scratch is hardly anyone’s idea of fun. So, after going through this more than a few times, I began trying to figure out the problems on my own.

The skills I gained from this were likely not much by today’s standards, but they were enough for friends and relatives to dub me their go-to “computer guy” for all their computing needs. I did not mind it much, to be honest—it was time-consuming, but each issue was a unique puzzle and I enjoyed the process involved in solving it. The entire experience taught me how to analyze the situation, troubleshoot it to narrow down the problem, and take the appropriate steps needed to correct the software or hardware issue. If I did not know the answer to a particular problem, I searched online for it. Obtaining such information was difficult at first, but became easier as I became better at using the right keyword combinations for the search engines. This has proven to be a very useful skill in the age of “Googling.”

Despite all my experience working with computers, aside from Command Prompt, I did not dabble in anything resembling coding until I took an AP Java class in my senior year of high school. Before that, coding seemed like a mysterious world of hackers and *l33t (1337)* speak. When I first began the Java class, it was like jumping into a lake to teach myself to swim without a life vest or the ability to float. Oh, did I mention the alligators? Yep. Alligators.

All exaggeration aside, though, the course was difficult, as our instructor took a hands-off approach, which meant he expected us to teach ourselves and still pass his exams without much direction. I barely understood what I was supposed to be doing at first. When I finally began to comprehend some of it, the school canceled the course because the class did not have enough students. Despite the challenges, the class had provided enough exposure to get me excited about computer programming. I began playing around with HTML in the months that followed and made a couple of basic websites, but that was about it.

I wanted to take computer science as my major in college, but my parents and extended family found this to be unacceptable. They wanted to me to get a degree in biology and go to medical school—nothing less would suffice. I was not particularly happy about this, but it was not as if I found biology to be uninteresting. Moreover, it helped provide me with a clearer sense of why I want to learn to code—a realization that came in two stages. The first involved a course on neurology, in which the instructor showed the class a video of image reconstruction using computer software. The software was able analyze the patterns in brain activity to reconstruct approximations of images the test subject saw. The reconstructed images became less clear the more abstract the viewed object became, but it was a start and enough to kick start my imagination. I began envisioning a world in which technology could be seamlessly integrated with the brain to provide greater insights and capabilities, like enhanced sight, learning, and memory.

This led me to wonder how I could become involved in such research. I received my answer during stage two, when a biology concentration in bioinformatics became available. It prompted me to begin taking courses in computer science, which introduced me to Python. This was my second exposure to programming. Fortunately, the experience was much better the second time around, as Python was easier to understand than Java had been. I wanted to learn more, but things did not go the way I had planned. I graduated before I could go further in that direction.

It would be a few years before I was exposed to programming again, but the opportunity came in 2014 while working as a bio-technician in a neurophysiology lab. An acquaintance introduced me to business intelligence and offered to teach it to me. I learned SQL, PL-SQL, what relational databases are and how to manipulate them, and how to use some of the software associated with business intelligence. I picked up on the material quickly and tried entering the field using what I had learned, but I lacked the required 10+ years of experience that most businesses wanted. I did intern at one company for a short time, but it did not last long and was not enough to get me a job. It was disappointing and I wanted to pursue this further, but circumstances arose that did not permit this at the time.

(Oh dear... this is getting to be much longer than I wanted.)

Let's fast-forward to 2016 and my fourth exposure to the programming world. I became acquainted with individuals who had attended coding boot camps. Two of them were from Flatiron and had great things to say about the program. I wanted to apply right away, but I felt intimidated because I did not know how to code. So, I began searching online for ways to learn programming on my own. I used websites like Codecademy, W3Schools, and Udemy to learn the basics of HTML, CSS, Javascript, and Python. It helped, but I still felt unsure if it was the correct way to learn. I again looked into Flatiron, but did not want to apply until I felt ready. As a result, I matriculated into a college computer science program with a concentration in bioinformatics. It was what I wanted to pursue anyway, but my primary short-term goal was to take a programming course or two in preparation for the bootcamp. One course taught C++ while the other taught bash and an introduction to PERL. The C++ course was meant for individuals who already had plenty of experience coding, so it was a lot more intense than I anticipated. There was rarely a moment when I had free time, as I would barely manage to complete one project before the instructors assigned a new one. I coded for 80+ hours a week throughout the course as I worked to catch up to everyone else. I breathed code, ate code, dreamt code, and woke up thinking about the latest coding problem I was working on. It was all I could think about and it was thrilling. Fortunately, the hard work paid off because it provided me with the knowledge and confidence to burn away any hesitation I felt in applying to Flatiron.

In applying to Flatiron, I have chosen to take the road less traveled and I do not know what kind of job I will get after graduating, but it is an important stepping stone and will not be the end of the journey for me. I am entering a field that necessitates continued lifelong learning and this is but the prelude to something much more. I, for one, intend on putting in my best effort to learn all that I can along the way.
